John Donne
Meditation #17 from Devotions upon 
Emergent Occasions (1623), XVII:

Nunc Lento Sonitu Dicunt, Morieris (Now this
bell, tolling softly for another, says to me,
Thou must die.)

Perchance, he for whom this bell tolls may be
so ill, as that he knows not it tolls for
him; and perchance I may think myself so
much better than I am, as that they who are
about me, and see my state, may have caused
it to toll for me, and I know not that. The
church is catholic, universal, so are all her
actions; all that she does belongs to all.
When she baptizes a child, that action
concerns me; for that child is thereby
connected to that body which is my head too,
and ingrafted into that body whereof I am a
member. And when she buries a man, that
action concerns me: all mankind is of one
author, and is one volume; when one man dies,
one chapter is not torn out of the book, but
translated into a better language; and every
chapter must be so translated; God employs
several translators; some pieces are
translated by age, some by sickness, some by
war, some by justice; but God's hand is in
every translation, and his hand shall bind up
all our scattered leaves again for that
library where every book shall lie open to
one another. As therefore the bell that rings
to a sermon calls not upon the preacher only,
but upon the congregation to come, so this
bell calls us all; but how much more me, who
am brought so near the door by this sickness.
There was a contention as far as a suit (in
which both piety and dignity, religion and
estimation, were mingled), which of the
religious orders should ring to prayers first
in the morning; and it was determined, that
they should ring first that rose earliest. If
we understand aright the dignity of this bell
that tolls for our evening prayer, we would
be glad to make it ours by rising early, in
that application, that it might be ours as
well as his, whose indeed it is. The bell
doth toll for him that thinks it doth; and
though it intermit again, yet from that
minute that this occasion wrought upon him,
he is united to God. Who casts not up his eye
to the sun when it rises? but who takes off
his eye from a comet when that breaks out?
Who bends not his ear to any bell which upon
any occasion rings? but who can remove it
from that bell which is passing a piece of
himself out of this world? No man is an
island, entire of itself; every man is a
piece of the continent, a part of the main.
If a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe
is the less, as well as if a promontory were,
as well as if a manor of thy friend's or of
thine own were: any man's death diminishes
me, because I am involved in mankind, and
therefore never send to know for whom the
bell tolls; it tolls for thee. Neither can we
call this a begging of misery, or a borrowing
of misery, as though we were not miserable
enough of ourselves, but must fetch in more
from the next house, in taking upon us the
misery of our neighbours. Truly it were an
excusable covetousness if we did, for
affliction is a treasure, and scarce any man
hath enough of it. No man hath affliction
enough that is not matured and ripened by it,
and made fit for God by that affliction. If a
man carry treasure in bullion, or in a wedge
of gold, and have none coined into current
money, his treasure will not defray him as he
travels. Tribulation is treasure in the
nature of it, but it is not current money in
the use of it, except we get nearer and
nearer our home, heaven, by it. Another man
may be sick too, and sick to death, and this
affliction may lie in his bowels, as gold in
a mine, and be of no use to him; but this
bell, that tells me of his affliction, digs
out and applies that gold to me: if by this
consideration of another's danger I take mine
own into contemplation, and so secure myself,
by making my recourse to my God, who is our
only security.