The Mirror Stage as Formative
of the / Function
as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience
Delivered on July 17, 194% in Zurich at the Sixteenth
International Congress of Psychoanalysis

The conception of the mirror stage I introduced at our last congress thirteen
years ago, having since been more or less adopted by the French group, seems
worth bringing to your attention once again—especially today, given the light
it sheds on the / function in the experience psychoanalysis provides us of it.
It should be noted that this experience sets us at odds with any philosophy
directly stemming from the cogito.
Some of you may recall the behavioral characteristic I begin with that is
explained by a fact of comparative psychology: the human child, at an age
when he is for a short while, but for a while nevertheless, outdone by the chimpanzee in instrumental intelligence, can already recognize his own image as
such in a mirror. This recognition is indicated by the illuminative mimicry of
the Aha-Erlebnis, which Kohler considers to express situational apperception,
an essential moment in the act of intelligence.
Indeed, this act, far from exhausting itself, as in the case of a monkey, in
eventually acquired control over the uselessness of the image, immediately
gives rise in a child to a series of gestures in which he playfully experiences
the relationship between the movements made in the image and the reflected
environment, and between this virtual complex and the reality it duplicates—
namely, the child's own body, and the persons and even things around him.
This event can take place, as we know from Baldwin's work, from the age
of six months on; its repetition has often given me pause to reflect upon the
striking spectacle of a nursling in front of a mirror who has not yet mastered

7<5

95

Ecrits

walking, or even standing, but who—though held tightly by some prop, human
or artificial (what, in France, we call a trotte-bebe [a sort of walker])—overcomes, in a flutter of jubilant activity, the constraints of his prop in order to
adopt a slightly leaning-forward position and take in an instantaneous view
of the image in order to fix it in his mind.
In my view, this activity has a specific meaning up to the age of eighteen
months, and reveals both a libidinal dynamism that has hitherto remained problematic and an ontological structure of the human world that fits in with my
reflections on paranoiac knowledge.
It suffices to understand the mirror stage in this context as an identification,
in the full sense analysis gives to the term: namely, the transformation that
takes place in the subject when he assumes [assume] an image—an image that
is seemingly predestined to have an effect at this phase, as witnessed by the
use in analytic theory of antiquity's term, "imago."
The jubilant assumption [assomption] of his specular image by the kind of
being—still trapped in his motor impotence and nursling dependence—the
little man is at the infans stage thus seems to me to manifest in an exemplary
situation the symbolic matrix in which the /is precipitated in a primordial form,
prior to being objectified in the dialectic of identification with the other, and
before language restores to it, in the universal, its function as subject.
This form would, moreover, have to be called the "ideal-I"x—if we wanted
to translate it into a familiar register—in the sense that it will also be the rootstock of secondary identifications, this latter term subsuming the libidinal normalization functions. But the important point is that this form situates the
agency known as the ego, prior to its social determination, in a fictional direction that will forever remain irreducible for any single individual or, rather,
that will only asymptotically approach the subject's becoming, no matter how
successful the dialectical syntheses by which he must resolve, as I, his discordance with his own reality.
For the total form of his body, by which the subject anticipates the maturation of his power in a mirage, is given to him only as a gestalt, that is, in an
exteriority in which, to be sure, this form is more constitutive than constituted,
but in which, above all, it appears to him as the contour of his stature that
freezes it and in a symmetry that reverses it, in opposition to the turbulent
movements with which the subject feels he animates it. Through these two
aspects of its appearance, this gestalt—whose power [pregnance] should be
considered linked to the species, though its motor style is as yet unrecognizable—symbolizes the / ' s mental permanence, at the same time as it prefigures
its alienating destination. This gestalt is also replete with the correspondences
that unite the /with the statue onto which man projects himself, the phantoms

The Mirror Stage as Formative of the /Function

77

that dominate him, and the automaton with which the world of his own making tends to achieve fruition in an ambiguous relation.
Indeed, for imagos—whose veiled faces we analysts see emerge in our daily
experience and in the penumbra of symbolic effectiveness2—the specular image
seems to be the threshold of the visible world, if we take into account the mirrored disposition of the imago of one's own body in hallucinations and dreams,
whether it involves one's individual features, or even one's infirmities or object
projections; or if we take note of the role of the mirror apparatus in the appearance of doubles, in which psychical realities manifest themselves that are, moreover, heterogeneous.
The fact that a gestalt may have formative effects on an organism is attested
to by a biological experiment that is so far removed from the idea of psychical causality that it cannot bring itself to formulate itself in such terms. The
experiment nevertheless acknowledges that it is a necessary condition for the
maturation of the female pigeon's gonad that the pigeon see another member
of its species, regardless of its sex; this condition is so utterly sufficient that
the same effect may be obtained by merely placing a mirror's reflective field
near the individual. Similarly, in the case of the migratory locust, the shift within
a family line from the solitary to the gregarious form can be brought about
by exposing an individual, at a certain stage of its development, to the exclusively visual action of an image akin to its own, provided the movements of
this image sufficiently resemble those characteristic of its species. Such facts
fall within a realm of homeomorphic identification that is itself subsumed
within the question of the meaning of beauty as formative and erogenous.
But mimetic facts, understood as heteromorphic identification, are of just
as much interest to us insofar as they raise the question of the signification of
space for living organisms—psychological concepts hardly seeming less
appropriate for shedding light here than the ridiculous attempts made to reduce
these facts to the supposedly supreme law of adaptation. We need but recall
how Roger Caillois (still young and fresh from his break with the sociological school at which he trained) illuminated the subject when, with the term
"legendary psychasthenia," he subsumed morphological mimicry within the
derealizing effect of an obsession with space.
As I myself have shown, human knowledge is more independent than animal knowledge from the force field of desire because of the social dialectic
that structures human knowledge as paranoiac;3 but what limits it is the "scant
reality" surrealistic unsatisfaction denounces therein. These reflections lead
me to recognize in the spatial capture manifested by the mirror stage, the effect
in man, even prior to this social dialectic, of an organic inadequacy of his natural reality—assuming we can give some meaning to the word "nature."

ys

97

Ecrits

The function of the mirror stage thus turns out, in my view, to be a particular case of the function of imagos, which is to establish a relationship between
an organism and its reality—or, as they say, between the Innenwelt and the
Umwelt.
In man, however, this relationship to nature is altered by a certain dehiscence at the very heart of the organism, a primordial Discord betrayed by the
signs of malaise and motor uncoordination of the neonatal months. The objective notions of the anatomical incompleteness of the pyramidal tracts and of
certain humoral residues of the maternal organism in the newborn confirm
my view that we find in man a veritable specific prematurity ofbirth.
Let us note in passing that this fact is recognized as such by embryologists,
under the heading "fetalization," as determining the superiority of the so-called
higher centers of the central nervous system, and especially of the cerebral
cortex which psychosurgical operations will lead us to regard as the intraorganic mirror.
This development is experienced as a temporal dialectic that decisively projects the individual's formation into history: the mirror stage is a drama whose
internal pressure pushes precipitously from insufficiency to anticipation—and,
for the subject caught up in the lure of spatial identification, turns out fantasies that proceed from a fragmented image of the body to what I will call an
"orthopedic" form of its totality—and to the finally donned armor of an alienating identity that will mark his entire mental development with its rigid structure. Thus, the shattering of the Innenwelt to Umwelt circle gives rise to an
inexhaustible squaring of the ego's audits.
This fragmented body—another expression I have gotten accepted into the
French school's system of theoretical references—is regularly manifested in
dreams when the movement of an analysis reaches a certain level of aggressive disintegration of the individual. It then appears in the form of disconnected limbs or of organs exoscopically represented, growing wings and
taking up arms for internal persecutions that the visionary Hieronymus Bosch
fixed for all time in painting, in their ascent in the fifteenth century to the imaginary zenith of modern man. But this form turns out to be tangible even at the
organic level, in the lines of "fragilization" that define the hysteric's fantasmatic anatomy, which is manifested in schizoid and spasmodic symptoms.
Correlatively, the / formation is symbolized in dreams by a fortified camp,
or even a stadium—distributing, between the arena within its walls and its outer
border of gravel-pits and marshes, two opposed fields of battle where the subject bogs down in his quest for the proud, remote inner castle whose form (sometimes juxtaposed in the same scenario) strikingly symbolizes the id. Similarly,
though here in the mental sphere, we find fortified structures constructed, the

The Mirror Stage as Formative of the / Function

79

metaphors for which arise spontaneously, as if deriving from the subject's very
symptoms, to designate the mechanisms of obsessive neurosis: inversion, isolation, reduplication, undoing what has been done, and displacement.
But were I to build on these subjective data alone—were I to so much as
free them from the experiential condition that makes me view them as based
on a language technique—my theoretical efforts would remain exposed to the
charge of lapsing into the unthinkable, that of an absolute subject. This is why
I have sought, in the present hypothesis grounded in a confluence of objective data, a method of symbolic reduction as my guiding grid.
It establishes a genetic order in ego defenses, in accordance with the wish
formulated by Anna Freud in the first part of her major book, and situates (as
against a frequently expressed prejudice) hysterical repression and its returns
at a more archaic stage than obsessive inversion and its isolating processes,
situating the latter as prior to the paranoiac alienation that dates back to the
time at which the specular / turns into the social / .
This moment at which the mirror stage comes to an end inaugurates,
through identification with the imago of one's semblable and the drama of
primordial jealousy (so well brought out by the Charlotte Btihler school in
cases of transitivism in children), the dialectic that will henceforth link the /
to socially elaborated situations.
It is this moment that decisively tips the whole of human knowledge [savoir]
into being mediated by the other's desire, constitutes its objects in an abstract
equivalence due to competition from other people, and turns the /into an apparatus to which every instinctual pressure constitutes a danger, even if it corresponds to a natural maturation process. The very normalization of this
maturation is henceforth dependent in man on cultural intervention, as is exemplified by the fact that sexual object choice is dependent upon the Oedipus
complex.
In light of my conception, the term "primary narcissism," by which analytic doctrine designates the libidinal investment characteristic of this
moment, reveals in those who invented it a profound awareness of semantic
latencies. But it also sheds light on the dynamic opposition between this libido
and sexual libido, an opposition they tried to define when they invoked
destructive and even death instincts in order to explain the obvious relationship between narcissistic libido and the alienating / function, and the aggressiveness deriving therefrom in all relations with others, even in relations
involving aid of the most good-Samaritan variety.
The fact is that they encountered that existential negativity whose reality
is so vigorously proclaimed by the contemporary philosophy of being and
nothingness.

8o

Ecrits

Unfortunately, this philosophy grasps that negativity only within the limits of a self*-sufficiency of consciousness, which, being one of its premises,
ties the illusion of autonomy in which it puts its faith to the ego's constitutive
misrecognitions. While it draws considerably on borrowings from psychoanalytic experience, this intellectual exercise culminates in the pretense of
grounding an existential psychoanalysis.
At the end of a society's historical enterprise to no longer recognize that
it has any but a utilitarian function, and given the individual's anxiety faced
with the concentration-camp form of the social link whose appearance seems
to crown this effort, existentialism can be judged on the basis of the justifications it provides for the subjective impasses that do, indeed, result therefrom:
a freedom that is never so authentically affirmed as when it is within the
walls of a prison; a demand for commitment that expresses the inability of
pure consciousness to overcome any situation; a voyeuristic-sadistic idealization of sexual relationships; a personality that achieves self-realization
only in suicide; and a consciousness of the other that can only be satisfied by
Hegelian murder.

ioo

These notions are opposed by the whole of analytic experience, insofar as
it teaches us not to regard the ego as centered on the perception-consciousness
system or as organized by the "reality principle"—the expression of a scientific bias most hostile to the dialectic of knowledge—but, rather, to take as
our point of departure the function ofmisrecognition that characterizes the ego
in all the defensive structures so forcefully articulated by Anna Freud. For,
while Verneinung [negation] represents the blatant form of that function, its
effects remain largely latent as long as they are not illuminated by some
reflected light at the level of fate where the id manifests itself.
The inertia characteristic of the / formations can thus be understood as
providing the broadest definition of neurosis, just as the subject's capture by
his situation gives us the most general formulation of madness—the kind found
within the asylum walls as well as the kind that deafens the world with its sound
and fury.
The sufferings of neurosis and psychosis provide us schooling in the passions of the soul, just as the balance arm of the psychoanalytic scales—when
we calculate the angle of its threat to entire communities—provides us with
an amortization rate for the passions of the city.
At this intersection of nature and culture, so obstinately scrutinized by the
anthropology of our times, psychoanalysis alone recognizes the knot of imaginary servitude that love must always untie anew or sever.
For such a task we can find no promise in altruistic feeling, we who lay bare

The Mirror Stage as Formative of the /Function

81

the aggressiveness that underlies the activities of the philanthropist, the idealist, the pedagogue, and even the reformer.
In the subject to subject recourse we preserve, psychoanalysis can accompany the patient to the ecstatic limit of the "Thou art that*9 where the cipher
of his mortal destiny is revealed to him, but it is not in our sole power as practitioners to bring him to the point where the true journey begins.
Notes
1.1 have let stand the peculiar translation I
adopted in this article for Freud's Ideal Ich [jeideal\, without further comment except to say
that I have not maintained it since.
2. See Claude Levi-Strauss' essay, entitled

"L'efficacite symbolique," in Revue de Vhistoire des religions CXXXV, 1 (1949): 5-27.
3. See, on this point, the texts that follow,
pages 111 and 180 [Ecrits 1966].

