"Our Father..."

While Rosemary was an easy child to manage,
as she got older her impulsiveness, and
rebellious attitudes grew. Her violent mood
swings got more common, and her relationship
with father deteriorated into constant
antagonism.

I think this is partially because she wasn't
keeping up with us, alongside the hormonal
surges of puberty. I can only imagine what it
must be like to see your brothers and sisters
riding rising tides into the adult world,
while you feel stuck, imprisoned even, within
your own challenges.

In any case, the family was now troubled by
her reckless impulsivity and aggressive
behavior. Most of all she frustrated father -
who expected us each to obey him with
impunity. I once heard him say he'd "send her
to an orphanage" if can't learn to "behave
appropriately". "Her erratic behavior will
bring shame and embarrassment upon the
family!"

But what he was really concerned with was the
possibility that she harm his political
career.

When Rosemary was 23, doctors told our father
there was a neurological procedure that might
help settle her moods. He decided the surgery
was the best way to end her violent
outbursts. He didn't tell our mother of this
until after the surgery was over.

Doctor Gregory Campos carried out the
procedure with Walter Freeman, of the Redford
Psychological and Correctional facility, who
detailed what happened next:

"We went through the top of the head, I think
she was awake. She had a mild tranquilizer. I
made a surgical incision in the brain through
the skull. It was near the front, on both
sides. We just made a small incision, no more
than an inch." The instrument Dr. Campos used
looked like a butter knife. He swung it up
and down to cut brain tissue. As Dr. Campos
cut, Dr. Freeman put questions to Rosemary.
For example, he asked her to recite the
Lord's Payer or count backwards... "We made
an estimate on how far to cut based on how
she responded." When she began to become
incoherent, we stopped.

After the lobotomy it was obvious to all that
the procedure had failed. Rosemary could not
walk, or speak. She'd just sit, drenched in
her own piss and shit. All to protect
father's career.