      ISAAC + DCPS OFFICER <3

I knew it! I now pronounce us married!
How does it feel? I'm so happy.

So I guess you want to know how it ends,
don't you honey? Aww, baby. Really?
You know it hurts me. Yes, I do love you.
Yes, I would do anything for you! Okay. 
Let me try.

























No. NO NO NO!













NO!


































I DON'T WANT TO REMEMBER!





























WHY ARE YOU DOING THIS TO ME!

























STOP!









































































































Okay.







































I... at the height of my career in the DCPS. 
I knew I was untouchable. Hell, I locked up 
my old english teacher because of the time 
he touched me. I don't think you understand. 
I was a fucking god. 

Until June 3rd. You see there's somebody I've
left out of this story. I didn't want anyone
to know my little secret. But now that we're
married - well it's bad karma for a newly wed
to hide things from their spouse. 

I was in love. Mia was her name. I had two 
beautiful little boys. I had married Mia long
before joining the DCPS. She was the only 
person who understood, you know, the real me.
The thing underneath all this flesh and bones.
I wanted to protect her, so I never told her
about my work at the DCPS or that I got 
caught. Officer, you have to understand how 
much she meant to me. I would never do 
anything to hurt her. In fact, when I rose
through the DCPS I was certain I would be 
in a better position to protect her.

Well. On the evening of June 3rd, Mia and 
I got into an arguement. I had become 
distant because of my work. It started off
with something stupid - I think she found my
DCPS parole form in the mail. She thought 
she knew my secret, but I knew all of hers. 
In fact, she was my favorite person to watch.
She lashed out at me that I wasn't doing 
enough to support the kids and that the 
job at taken over my life. At this time, 
things were beginning to get heated. I said
she needed to relax before things got out
of hand. She said that she would 
never leave the kids like I have. Oh, 
that really set me off. Did she not 
know what I was sacrificing to protect 
them? AND HER?

In a fit of rage, I screamed at her

'Well why did you have the abortion!'

She said nothing. She walked to her room,
packed her bags, and took the kids. She knew
I was watching her. My heart sank as she
walked out the door. I'm sure she was going
to her mother's to cool off. 

But on the way... she ... she ... 






