Hello Again,

    At this point in my life I felt
invincible. My career was on fire, I had
helped myself and the people I love out out
of poverty - everything was going my way. And
yet, all the demolition projects and simple
explosives work I was doing didn’t satisfy. I
had gotten into this for the artistic
elements involved. I missed the playful chaos
of fireworks, the smell of the old powders,
and the way you could woo a city with lights
in the sky. Taking down condemned buildings
was grungy and boring by comparison.
    Soon I was contracted by a paramilitary
corporation called Redwater to develop a
weapon. My work had never been directed at
taking life before. A disconcerting position
to be put in, to say the least.
    It reminded me of a story I had heard
while in my engineering program. The tale
goes as follows: during the Renaissance,
Leonardo Da Vinci was commissioned by a local
lord to build an anti-siege weapon. Da Vinci
designed and constructed a massive Ballista -
a hulking wooden crossbow used to launch
massive iron-tipped bolts. But Da Vinci, ever
the pacifist, did not wish to build a
functional death machine. So he hobbled his
design. He created a weapon that looked
terrifying, but in fact could not fire
without breaking itself. Nonetheless, the
local lord accepted the faulty Ballista and
mounted it on his castle wall - oddly, the
dangerous image it struct was a powerful
enough deterrent, and the Ballista never
needed to be used.
    With this tale in mind, I took on the
paramilitary contract. My passion for
fireworks returned with a vengeance, and over
the following year I poured close to 14
million dollars of the project budget into an
explosive I knew to be non-lethal. How bright
the colors were, how loud! It was glorious.
    Eventually, an overseer of the project
from Redwater caught wind of the “weapon’s”
poor testing. After a closer examination, it
was discovered that I never intended to
project to kill, and I was fired.
    Though disappointed to see the project
end, I thought I’d go back to work in
demolitions and everything would be fine. I
was wrong.

- David Finley